Add a blog for discovery selectors (#9631)
istio/istio.io: content/en/blog/2021/discovery-selectors/index.md

---

> title: "Use DiscoverySelectors To Configure Namespaces For Your Istio Service Mesh"

Author: Yea, I saw more blogs using upper case first char when I checked so I went with it.

> title: "Use DiscoverySelectors To Configure Namespaces For Your Istio Service Mesh"

Author: I think either is fine.

> title: "Use DiscoverySelectors To Configure Namespaces For Your Istio Service Mesh"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Use DiscoverySelectors to configure namespaces for your Istio service mesh"
```

I prefer title case, though I'd also suggest we drop "for your Istio service mesh" as this is on the Istio blog.

Reviewer: Plus, the actual field is "discoverySelectors", so I'm not sure about the capital D throughout?

> description: Learn how to use DiscoverySelectors and how it intersects with Sidecar resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Learn how to use DiscoverySelectors and how they intersect with Sidecar resources.
```

publishdate: 2021-04-30
attribution: "Lin Sun (Solo.io), Christian Posta (Solo.io), Harvey Xia (Solo.io)"
keywords: [discoveryselectors,Istio,namespaces,sidecar]
---

> As users move their services to run in a service mesh, they are often surprised that the Istio control plane watches and processes all of the Istio and Kubernetes resources from all namespaces in the cluster by default. This can be an issue for very large clusters with lots of namespaces and deployments or even for a moderately sized cluster with rapidly churning resources (for example, Spark jobs).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As users move their services to run in the Istio service mesh, they are often surprised that the control plane watches and processes all of the Kubernetes resources, from all namespaces in the cluster, by default. This can be an issue for very large clusters with lots of namespaces and deployments, or even for a moderately sized cluster with rapidly churning resources (for example, Spark jobs).
```

> Both [in the community](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/26679) as well as for our large-scale customers at [Solo.io](https://solo.io), we need a way to dynamically restrict the set of namespaces that are part of the mesh so that the Istio control plane only processes Istio and Kubernetes resources in those namespaces. The ability to restrict the namespaces enables Istiod to watch and push fewer resources and associated changes to the sidecars, thus improving the overall performance on the control plane and data plane.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both [in the community](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/26679) as well as for our large-scale customers at [Solo.io](https://solo.io), we need a way to dynamically restrict the set of namespaces that are part of the mesh so that the Istio control plane only processes resources in those namespaces. The ability to restrict the namespaces enables Istiod to watch and push fewer resources and associated changes to the sidecars, thus improving the overall performance on the control plane and data plane.
```

> on the control plane and data plane.

of the mesh?

## Background

> By default, Istio watches all namespaces/services/endpoints/pods in a cluster. For example, in my Kubernetes cluster, I deployed the sleep service in the default namespace, and the httpbin service in the ns-x namespace. I’ve added the sleep service to the mesh, and I have no plan to add the httpbin service in the ns-x namespace to the mesh or have any service in the mesh interact with the httpbin service in the ns-x namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, Istio watches all Namespaces, Services, Endpoints and Pods in a cluster. For example, in my Kubernetes cluster, I deployed the `sleep` service in the default namespace, and the `httpbin` service in the `ns-x` namespace. I’ve added the `sleep` service to the mesh, but I have no plan to add the `httpbin` service to the mesh, or have any service in the mesh interact with the `httpbin` service.
```

(I don't think the specificity was needed)

> By default, Istio watches all namespaces/services/endpoints/pods information in a cluster. For example, in my Kubernetes cluster, I deployed the sleep service in the default namespace, and the httpbin service in the ns-x namespace. I’ve added sleep services to the mesh and I have no plan to add the httpbin service in the ns-x namespace to the mesh or have any service in the mesh interact with the httpbin service in the ns-x namespace.

Author: updated

> Use `istioctl pc endpoint` command to display all the endpoints for the sleep deployment:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use `istioctl proxy-config endpoint` command to display all the endpoints for the `sleep` deployment:
```

(better teaching moment to use the full name)

> Use `istioctl pc endpoint` command to display all the endpoints for the sleep deployment:

Author: it is the same :) pc is the shortened cmd.

{{< image link="./endpoints-default.png" caption="Endpoints for Sleep Deployment" >}}

> Note that the httpbin service endpoint in the ns-x namespace is in the list of discovered endpoints. This may not be an issue when you only have a few services. However, when you have hundreds of services that don't interact with any of the services running in the Istio service mesh, you probably don't want your Istio control plane to watch these services and send their information to the sidecars of your services in the mesh.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the `httpbin` service endpoint in the `ns-x` namespace is in the list of discovered endpoints. This may not be an issue when you only have a few services. However, when you have hundreds of services that don't interact with any of the services running in the Istio service mesh, you probably don't want or need your control plane to watch these services, or send their information to the sidecars of your services in the mesh.
```

> ## Introduce DiscoverySelectors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Introducing DiscoverySelectors
```

> In Istio 1.10, we introduced the new `DiscoverySelectors` option to [MeshConfig](/docs/reference/config/istio.mesh.v1alpha1/#MeshConfig), which is an array of Kubernetes [selectors](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/labels/#resources-that-support-set-based-requirements). The exact type is `[]LabelSelector`, as defined [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/labels/#resources-that-support-set-based-requirements), allowing both simple selectors and set-based selectors. These selectors apply to labels on namespaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Istio 1.10, we introduced the new `DiscoverySelectors` option to [MeshConfig](/docs/reference/config/istio.mesh.v1alpha1/#MeshConfig), which is an array of [Kubernetes selectors](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/labels/#resources-that-support-set-based-requirements). The exact type is `[]LabelSelector`, as defined [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/labels/#resources-that-support-set-based-requirements), allowing both simple selectors and set-based selectors. These selectors apply to labels on namespaces.
```

> In Istio 1.10, we introduced the new `DiscoverySelectors` option to [MeshConfig](/docs/reference/config/istio.mesh.v1alpha1/#MeshConfig), which is an array of Kubernetes [selectors](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/labels/#resources-that-support-set-based-requirements). The exact type will be `[]LabelSelector`, as defined [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/labels/#resources-that-support-set-based-requirements), allowing both simple selectors and set-based selectors. These selectors apply to labels on namespaces.

Reviewer 2: You have `In 1.10, we introduced` which seems like this is written after the fact.  Later you have `The exact type will be` which seems like it’s written before.

Author: corrected

You can configure each label selector for expressing a variety of use cases, including but not limited to:

* Arbitrary label names/values, for example, all namespaces with label `istio-discovery=enabled`
* A list of namespace labels using set-based selectors which carries OR semantics, for example, all namespaces with label `istio-discovery=enabled` OR `region=us-east1`
* Inclusion and/or exclusion of namespaces, for example, all namespaces with label istio-discovery=enabled AND label key `app` equal to `helloworld`

Note: `DiscoverySelectors` is not a security boundary. Istiod will continue to have access to all namespaces even when you have configured your `DiscoverySelectors`.

## DiscoverySelectors in Action

> Assuming you know which namespaces to include as part of the service mesh, as a mesh administrator, you can configure `DiscoverySelectors` at installation time or post-installation by adding your desired discovery selectors to Istio’s MeshConfig resource. For example, you can configure Istio to discover only the namespace that has the label `istio-discovery=enabled`.

Reviewer 2: The first sentence is long, although I don't have a good idea on how to shorten/split it.

Reviewer 2: Will it discover a single namespace or should this read: ` For example, you can configure Istio to discover only the namespaces that have the label `istio-discovery=enabled`.`

Author: corrected :)

> 1. Enable all namespaces with this label. Using our examples earlier, let’s enable namespace default with label `istio-discovery=enabled`.

Reviewer 2: Maybe tweak this some. In #1, you aren't really `Enable all namespaces with this label`. so let's move that text to #2.

Thought:
1. Using our examples earlier, let’s label namespace default with label `istio-discovery=enabled`.   (Note I changed to label from enable)
2. Enable all namespaces with this label. Use istioctl....

Author: I am not sure why I had `Enable all namespaces with this label. ` seems unnecessary to me now. :)

> 1. Enable all namespaces with this label. Using our examples earlier, let’s enable namespace default with label `istio-discovery=enabled`.

Reviewer 2: You need to indent the text bash to get the numbers correct. If you look at the actual page in the deploy test, you will see they are all 1.

Author: Thank YOU!!!

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl label namespace default istio-discovery=enabled
{{< /text >}}

> 1. Use istioctl to apply the yaml with `DiscoverySelectors` to update your Istio installation. Note, to avoid any impact to your stable environment, we recommend you to use a different revision for your Istio installation:

Author: updated

{{< text bash >}}
$ istioctl install --skip-confirmation -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: install.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: IstioOperator
metadata:
 namespace: istio-system
spec:
 # You may override parts of meshconfig by uncommenting the following lines.
 meshConfig:
   discoverySelectors:
     - matchLabels:
         istio-discovery: enabled
EOF
{{< /text >}}

> 1. Display endpoint configuration from sleep pod:

Reviewer 2: from or for? (you have for in the picture title and I like that better) and maybe add `the`

Author: updated

> 1. Display the endpoint configuration for the sleep pod:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Display the endpoint configuration for the `sleep` pod:
```

> 1. Display the endpoint configuration for sleep pod:

Reviewer 2: for **the** sleep

Author: updated

    {{< image link="./endpoints-with-discovery-selectors.png" caption="Endpoints for Sleep Deployment With DiscoverySelectors" >}}

>     Note this time the httpbin service in the ns-x namespace is NOT in the list of discovered endpoints, along with many other services that are not in the default namespace. If you display routes (or cluster or listeners) information for the sleep deployment, you will also notice much reduced configuration are returned:

Reviewer 2: much less configuration is returned

Author: updated

>     Note this time the httpbin service in the ns-x namespace is NOT in the list of discovered endpoints, along with many other services that are not in the default namespace. If you display routes (or cluster or listeners) information for the sleep deployment, you will also notice much less configuration is returned:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Note this time the `httpbin` service in the `ns-x` namespace is NOT in the list of discovered endpoints, along with many other services that are not in the default namespace. If you display routes (or cluster or listeners) information for the `sleep` deployment, you will also notice much less configuration is returned:
```

    {{< image link="./routes-with-discovery-selectors.png" caption="Routes for Sleep Deployment With DiscoverySelectors" >}}

> You can use `matchLabels` to configure multiple labels with AND semantics or use `matchLabels` sets to configure OR semantics among multiple labels. Whether you deploy services or pods to namespaces with different sets of labels or multiple application teams in your organization use different labeling conventions, `DiscoverySelectors` provides the flexibility you need. Furthermore, you could use `matchLabels` and `matchExpressions` together per our [documentation](https://github.com/istio/api/blob/master/mesh/v1alpha1/config.proto#L792). Refer to the Kubernetes [selector docs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/labels/#label-selectors) for additional detail on selector semantics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use `matchLabels` to configure multiple labels with AND semantics or use `matchLabels` sets to configure OR semantics among multiple labels. Whether you deploy services or pods to namespaces with different sets of labels or multiple application teams in your organization use different labeling conventions, `DiscoverySelectors` provides the flexibility you need. Furthermore, you could use `matchLabels` and `matchExpressions` together per our [documentation](https://github.com/istio/api/blob/master/mesh/v1alpha1/config.proto#L792). Refer to the [Kubernetes selector docs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/labels/#label-selectors) for additional detail on selector semantics.
```

> ## DiscoverySelectors vs Sidecar Resource

Reviewer: Are you saying `DiscoverySelectors` through out to (a) refer to a resource type (b) please the spelling checker?

It might be better to start saying "Discovery selectors" if that's the feature name.

Author: Yes that is the feature name.  I'll take your suggestion

The `DiscoverySelectors` configuration enables users to dynamically restrict the set of namespaces that are part of the mesh. A [Sidecar](/docs/reference/config/networking/sidecar/) resource also controls the visibility of sidecar configurations and what gets pushed to the sidecar proxy. What are the differences between them?

* The `DiscoverySelectors` configuration declares what Istio control plane watches and processes. Without DiscoverySelectors configuration, the Istio control plane watches and processes all namespaces/services/endpoints/pods in the cluster regardless of the sidecar resources you have.
* `DiscoverySelectors` is configured globally for the mesh by the mesh administrators. While sidecar resources can also be configured for the mesh globally by the mesh administrators in the MeshConfig root namespace,  they are commonly configured by service owners for their namespaces.

> You can use `DiscoverySelectors` with Sidecar resources. You can use `DiscoverySelectors` to configure at the mesh-wide level what namespaces the Istio control plane should watch and process. For these namespaces in the Istio service mesh, you can create Sidecar resources globally or per namespace to further control what gets pushed to the sidecar proxies.  Let us add bookinfo services to the ns-y namespace in the mesh as shown below in the diagram. `DiscoverySelectors` enables us to define the default and ns-y namespaces are part of the mesh. How can we configure the sleep service not to see anything other than the default namespace? Adding a sidecar resource for the default namespace, we can effectively configure the sleep sidecar to only have visibility to the clusters/routes/listeners/endpoints associated with its current namespace plus any other required namespaces.

Reviewer 2: Bookinfo

Reviewer 2: as shown in the diagram below

Author: updated

{{< image link="./discovery-selectors-vs-sidecar.png" caption="DiscoverySelectors vs Sidecar Resource" >}}

> ## Let Us Wrap Up

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Wrapping up
```

> `DiscoverySelectors` is a powerful configuration to tune the Istio control plane only to watch and process specific namespaces. If you don't want all namespaces in your Kubernetes cluster to be part of the service mesh or you have multiple Istio service meshes within your Kubernetes cluster, we highly recommend you to explore this configuration and reach out to us for feedback on our Istio [slack](https://istio.slack.com) or GitHub.

Reviewer 2: plane to only watch

> `DiscoverySelectors` is a powerful configuration to tune the Istio control plane only to watch and process specific namespaces. If you don't want all namespaces in your Kubernetes cluster to be part of the service mesh or you have multiple Istio service meshes within your Kubernetes cluster, we highly recommend you to explore this configuration and reach out to us for feedback on our Istio [slack](https://istio.slack.com) or GitHub.

Reviewer 2: [Istio slack] ?
